# Pattern Matching Protocol

The library exposes the `@@extractor` and `@@ignored` symbols which are used in the pattern matching protocol.  

An object that implements pattern matching has a `@@extractor` function which takes in two arguments, the `value` of the thing to match, and `previousExtracted` which is an object containing any previous extracted values.  
It must return an object with a property `matched` containing a boolean on whether a match was made and if it did, a property `extracted` containing an object of extracted values.  

The object can also have a boolean `@@ignored` property.  
This indicates that the pattern matching will ignore the value to match with, allowing for some optimizations.  

The library also contains a `Pattern` abstract class in the `patterns` object for extending, containing utility methods.  
When pattern constructors expect a pattern to be passed in, `Pattern.patternOf` should be ran to ensure it has `@@extractor`.  
The method `patternOf` takes in a value, and if it has `@@extractor`, return it, otherwise:  

- If the value is primitive, wrap it in an `EqualPattern`.
- If the value is an array, pass it to `ArrayPattern`.
- If the value is a `Map`, pass it to `MapPattern`.
- Otherwise, pass it to `ObjectPattern`.

For the last three cases, if the structure has the `@@rest` symbol in it, it will be used as the rest pattern:  

- For arrays, the last item must be `[@@rest, pattern]`.
- For `Map`s, there must be an entry `@@rest => pattern`.
- For objects, there must be an entry `[@@rest]: pattern`.

Each branch of `patternOf` has corresponding `patternOfPrimitive`, `patternOfArray`, `patternOfMap`, and `patternOfObject` methods.  
The `Pattern` class also has the methods `test` and `match` corresponding to the built-in `tester` and `matcher` functions.  

Example of a custom pattern:  

```js
class NotEqualAndBindPattern extends Pattern {
    constructor(value, id) {
        super();
        this.value = value;
        this.id = id;
    }

    [extractor](value, previousExtracted) {
        if (this.id in previousExtracted && value !== previousExtracted[this.id]) {
            return { matched: false };
        }

        return value !== this.value
            ? { matched: true, extracted: { [this.id]: value } }
            : { matched: false };
    }
}

// This object implements the protocol.
const pattern = new NotEqualAndBindPattern(10, 'x');

pattern[extractor](10, {})
→ { matched: false }

pattern[extractor](11, {})
→ { matched: true, extracted: { x: 11 } }

pattern[extractor](11, { x: 5 })
→ { matched: false }
```
