# Built-In Patterns

The library contains built-in patterns contained in the `patterns` object with shortcuts to create them in the `is` object.  
Below, any instatiated class refers to a class in the `patterns` object, any functions prefixed with `is` refers to one in the `is` object, and any other name refers to one on the library index object.  

**ID**  

- `new IDPattern(id)`  
- `is.id(id)`  
- `$(id)`  

Creates a pattern that matches any value and extracts it to `id` in the `extracted` object.  
If `previousExtracted` already has a key `id`, the value from there must be equal for the given value for a match.  

**Ignore**  

- `new IgnorePattern()`
- `is.ignore()`
- `_`

Creates a pattern that matches any value.  
The `_` shortcut is an already instantiated `IgnorePattern` so it can be used immediately.  

**Equal**  

- `new EqualPattern(value)`
- `is.equal(value)`

Creates a pattern that matches if the given value is equal using strict equality (`===`) with the `value`.  

**Multiple**  

- `new MultiplePattern(...values)`
- `is.oneOf(...values)`

Creates a pattern that matches if the given value is equal using strict equality (`===`) to any one of the `values`.  

**Range**  

- `new RangePattern(lowerBound, upperBound[, exclusive = true])`
- `is.inRange(lowerBound, upperBound[, exclusive = true])`

Creates a pattern that matches if the given value is within a range.  
JavaScript allows this to work with numbers, strings, and bigints.  

**Type**  

- `new TypePattern(type, pattern)`
- `is.type(type, pattern)`

Creates a pattern that matches if the `typeof` the given value is equal to `type` and that `pattern` also matches.  
The `extracted` object that `pattern` extracts is used.  

**Instance**  

- `new InstancePattern(Class, pattern)`
- `is.instance(Class, pattern)`
- `$$(Class, pattern)`

Creates a pattern that matches if the given value is an `instanceof Class` and that `pattern` also matches.  
The `extracted` object that `pattern` extracts is used.  

**Preguarded**  

- `new PreguardedPattern(predicate, pattern)`
- `is.preguarded(predicate, pattern)`

Creates a pattern that matches if the `predicate` of the given value is true and that `pattern` also matches.  
The `extracted` object that `pattern` extracts is used.  

**Guarded**  

- `new GuardedPattern(pattern, predicate)`
- `is.guarded(pattern, predicate)`

Creates a pattern that matches if the `pattern` matches and the `predicate` of the `extracted` object from `pattern` is true.  
The `extracted` object that `pattern` extracts is used.  

**Array**  

- `new ArrayPattern(patterns[, restPattern])`
- `is.array(patterns[, restPattern])`

Here, `patterns` must be an array.  
It creates a pattern that matches if:  

- The given value is an array.
- The given value has a length equal to the length of `patterns` or has a length at least equal to the length of `patterns` if a `restPattern` was given.
- Every pattern in `patterns` matches the corresponding element in the given value.
- The `restPattern` matches the rest of the array if it was given.

The `previousExtracted` object is updated after every pattern match in `patterns`.  

**Object**  

- `new ObjectPattern(patterns[, restPattern])`
- `is.object(patterns[, restPattern])`

Here, `patterns` must be an object.  
It creates a pattern that matches if:  

- The given value is an object.
- Every key in `patterns` exists in the given value.
- Every (key, pattern) in `patterns` matches the corresponding (key, value) in the given value.
- The `restPattern` matches the rest of the object (using own property names and symbols) if it was given.

The `previousExtracted` object is updated after every pattern match in `patterns`.  

**Map**  

- `new MapPattern(patterns[, restPattern])`
- `is.map(patterns[, restPattern])`

Here, `patterns` must be a `Map`.  
It creates a pattern that matches if:  

- The given value is a `Map`.
- Every key in `patterns` exists in the given value.
- Every (key, pattern) in `patterns` matches the corresponding (key, value) in the given value.
- The `restPattern` matches the rest of the map if it was given.

The `previousExtracted` object is updated after every pattern match in `patterns`.  

**View**

- `new ViewPattern(fn, pattern)`
- `is.view(fn, pattern)`

Creates a pattern that matches if `fn` of the given value matches the `pattern`.  
This is used to map a value into another for another pattern.  
The `extracted` object that `pattern` extracts is used.  

**Bind**

- `new BindPattern(pattern, id)`
- `is.bind(pattern, id)`

Creates a pattern that matches the given value with `pattern`.  
The original given value is then added to the `extracted` object with key `id`.  
The `extracted` object must not have a key the same as `id`, i.e. `pattern` cannot extract something with the same key as the bind pattern's `id`.  
If `previousExtracted` already has a key `id`, the value from there must be equal for the given value for a match.  
