# Function Builders

The library contains several function builders contained in the `functions` object with shortcuts to them on the library index object.  
Below, all functions to refer to one in the `functions` object, with the shortcut noted.  

**Matching Case By Case**  

- `cases()`

Creates a new cases function.  
A new case branch can be added with one of the following on the `cases()` object:  

- `case(patterns, callback)`
- `caseGuarded(patterns, predicate, callback)`

The `predicate` will take the `extracted` object and will return a boolean for whether the extracted values passed.  
The `callback` will take the `extracted` object and can return anything.  

Once all cases are added, the `cases()` object itself can be called with a value to match.  
It will match the given value through all the cases until one is found and runs its `callback`.  
If no case matches, an error is thrown.   

The shortcut functions `case` and `caseGuarded` on the library index is a shortcut to `cases().case` and `cases().caseGuarded`.  

```js
pat
    .case(1, () => 1)
    .case(2, () => 2)
    .case(3, () => 3)(3)
→ 3

pat
    .caseGuarded($('x'), ({ x }) => x.length >= 3, () => true)
    .case(_, () => false)([1, 2])
→ false
```

**Function with Clauses**  

- `clauses()`

Creates a new clauses function.  
A new clause branch can be added with one of the following on the `clauses()` object:  

- `clause(patterns, callback)`
- `clause(patterns, restPattern, callback)`
- `clauseGuarded(patterns, predicate, callback)`
- `clauseGuarded(patterns, restPattern, predicate, callback)`

Here, `patterns` is an array of patterns corresponding to the passed-in arguments.  
The `predicate` will take the `extracted` object and will return a boolean for whether the extracted values passed.  
The `callback` will take the `extracted` object and can return anything.  

Once all clauses are added, the `clauses()` object itself can be called with a parameter list.  
It will match the arguments through all the clauses until one is found and runs its `callback`.  
If no clause matches, an error is thrown.   

The shortcut functions `clause` and `clauseGuarded` on the library index is a shortcut to `clauses().clause` and `clauses().clauseGuarded`.  

```js
const fn = pat
    .clause([$('x')], ({ x }) => fn(x, 1))
    .clause([$('x'), $('y')], ({ x, y }) => x + y);

fn(5)
→ 6

fn(3, 4)
→ 7
```

**Test Match**  

- `tester(pattern)`

Creates a new test function.  
The return of `tester(pattern)` can then be called on a value to test if it matches.  
A pattern extending `Pattern` can also use `Pattern#test(value)`.  

The shortcut function `test(pattern, value)` on the library index is a shortcut to `tester(pattern)(value)`.  

```js
pat.test({ x: 5 }, { x: 1 })
→ false

pat.test({ x: 5 }, { x: 5 })
→ true
```

**Get Match**  

- `matcher(pattern)`

Creates a new match function.  
The return of `matcher(pattern)` can then be called on a value to get the `extracted` object if it matched, otherwise `null`.  
A pattern extending `Pattern` can also use `Pattern#match(value)`.  

The shortcut function `match(pattern, value)` on the library index is a shortcut to `matcher(pattern)(value)`.  

```js
pat.match({ x: $('x') }, { x: 1 })
→ { x: 1 }

pat.match({ x: 5 }, { y: 5 })
→ null
```
