# Tagged Unions

Headpats allow you to make tagged unions, also known as discriminated unions or sum types.  
Then, you can pattern match these values like other types.  

**Creation**  

- `union(name, ...types)`

The `pat.union` function creates a new class representing the tagged union.  
The `name` is the name of the union, and its used to correctly name the class.  
The `types` are the types in the union and can either be a string representing the name, or a `[string, kind]` pair.  
The `kind` would be one of `'value'` or `'array'`, and if not provided, defaults to `'value'`.  

The function returns a class for the tagged union which contains the types.  
Each type can be instantiated as they are just classes.  
A type with the `'value'` kind will only take in one argument, while the `'array'` kind can take in any.  
The class has one property, `value` for the value(s) passed in.  

```js
const Union = pat.union('Union', 'Value', ['AlsoValue', 'value'], ['Things', 'array']);
const { Value, AlsoValue, Things } = Union;

new Value(1)
→ Value { value: 1 }

new AlsoValue(2, 3, 4)
→ AlsoValue { value: 2 }

new Things(2, 3, 4)
→ Things { value: [2, 3, 4] }
```

Types with the `'value'` kind are for single-valued types, while the `'array'` kind can be used to simulate tuples.  

**Pattern Matching**  

While values from tagged unions can be matched with the `InstancePattern`, there is also `TagPattern`.  
They both check if the value extends some class, but the difference is that `TagPattern` will use the `value` property of the instance instead of the instance itself.  
The `TagPattern` is also available as `is.tag` and as a case of `$$` (see [here](2.%20Built-in%20Patterns.md) for specifics).  

```js
const { Some, None } = pat.union('Option', 'Some', 'None');

const unwrap = pat
    .case($$(Some, $.x), ({ x }) => x)
    .case($$(None, _), () => {
        throw new TypeError('Cannot unwrap None');
    });

unwrap(new Some(10))
→ 10

unwrap(new None())
→ Error
```

In order to get the original wrapped value instead of the value inside, you would use the bind pattern or the instance pattern.  

```js
const { Some, None } = pat.union('Option', 'Some', 'None');

pat.match(is.bind($$(Some, $.x), 's'), new Some(5))
→ { x: 5, s: Some { value: 5 } }

pat.match(is.instance(Some, $.x), new Some(5))
→ { x: Some { value: 5 } }
```
